Title: Accurate spectroscopic redshift estimation using non-negative matrix factorization: application to MUSE spectra

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.09389v1

Published Time: Wed, 11 Mar 2026 00:53:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. aa58275-25 ©ESO 2026 March 11, 2026 

# Accurate spectroscopic redshift estimation using non-negative matrix factorization: application to MUSE spectra 

Masten Bourahma 1, Nicolas F. Bouché 1, Roland Bacon 1, Johan Richard 1, Tanya Urrutia 2, Afonso Vale 3, 4,Martin Wendt 5, and T. T. Thai 6 

> 1

Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Ens de Lyon, CNRS, Centre de Recherche Astrophysique de Lyon (CRAL) UMR5574, F-69230 Saint-Genis-Laval, France e-mail: masten.bourahma@univ-lyon1.fr  

> 2

Leibniz-Institut für Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP), An der Sternwarte 16, 14482 Potsdam, Germany  

> 3

Instituto de Astrofísica e Ciências do Espaço, Universidade do Porto, CAUP, Rua das Estrelas, PT4150-762 Porto, Portugal  

> 4

Departamento de Física e Astronomia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre 687, PT4169-007 Porto, Portugal  

> 5

Institut für Physik und Astronomie, Universität Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24 /25, 14476 Golm, Germany  

> 6

National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, 2-21-1 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588 Japan Received —; accepted — 

ABSTRACT 

Accurate and automated galaxy redshift determination is essential for maximizing the scientific return of spectroscopic surveys. In this paper, we propose a data-driven method to address this challenge. The method first learns a rest-frame representation of galaxy spectra using Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF). The method then reconstructs new spectra using this representation at di ff erent trial redshifts, and identifies the correct redshift by selecting the one that minimizes the reconstruction error. We apply our method to galaxy spectra from the Multi Unit Spectroscopic Explorer (MUSE), covering redshifts from 0 to 6.7. Our method achieves an overall success rate of 93.7%. We further demonstrate two applications: (i) the separation between true and false sources, and (ii) the detection of blended sources from one-dimensional spectra. Our results demonstrate that NMF-based repre-sentations provide a powerful and physically motivated framework for redshift estimation in current and future large spectroscopic surveys. 

Key words. spectra, spectroscopic redshift, galaxies, NMF, Machine Learning 

1. Introduction 

All-sky Multi-Object Spectroscopic (MOS) surveys such as the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS York et al. 2000) and its up-grades (BOSS, eBOSS) have ushered astronomy into the big-data era, producing millions of spectra for objects down to 18–19 mag. MOS surveys on 4 meter class telescopes, including the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI Collaboration et al. 2022), the 4-Meter Multi-Object Spectroscopic Telescope (4MOST de Jong et al. 2019), and the WHT Enhanced Area Ve-locity Explorer (WEAVE Dalton et al. 2012), now deliver tens of millions of spectra reaching ∼ 22 magnitude. On a larger tele-scope, the Multi-Object Optical and Near-infrared Spectrograph (MOONS Cirasuolo et al. 2020) at the VLT will extend this capa-bility into the near-infrared. To maximize the scientific outcome of these large data surveys, strategies to perform fast, e ffi cient, and accurate automated object classification and redshift identi-fication have been developed. State-of-the-art tools for automated galaxy redshift estima-tion rely on spectral templates fitting, where a basis of galaxy spectra is first constructed and subsequently used to match ob-servations across trial redshifts. These tools adopt di ff erent tech-niques and strategies to build a set of representative templates of the galaxy population. For example, (Bolton et al. 2012) uses a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) procedure that accounts for measurement errors and missing data to learn a rest-frame representation of SDSS galaxies. Similarly, AUTOZ (Baldry et al. 2014), MARZ (Hinton et al. 2016; Inami et al. 2017), and xPCA 

(Krogager, in prep) use cross-correlation with a set of data-driven templates obtained with PCA, where stellar continuum is subtracted. Redrock (Anand et al. 2024) developed for the DESI pipeline uses a set of synthetic archetype galaxy tem-plates that were obtained from stellar population synthesis and models of emission line fluxes. Deep learning approaches have also been explored to derive rest-frame representations. For in-stance, Zhong et al. (2025, 4MOST) trained an encoder network "GaSNet-III " to learn a rest-frame representation of SDSS galaxy spectra and used it for redshift prediction, achieving com-petitive accuracy. Other deep learning models that do not rely on a rest-frame representation have also been explored. Zhong et al. (2025) trained a U-net network to transform spectra from the observed to the rest frame directly. Another example of such approaches is M-TOPnet (Ginolfi et al. 2025, MOONS). This network was trained through a multi-task learning framework to simultaneously predict the redshift probability density func-tion, stellar mass, star formation rate, and emission-line locations from the continuum-subtracted spectrum and a condensed con-tinuum vector. All of these tools demonstrated speed, high ac-curacy, and robustness within their respective MOS survey con-texts. While MOS surveys cover relatively bright pre-selected ob-jects from imaging surveys, Integral Field Spectroscopy (IFS) 

Article number, page 1 of 12  

> arXiv:2603.09389v1 [astro-ph.IM] 10 Mar 2026 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa58275-25

instruments, such as the Multi Unit Spectroscopic Explorer (MUSE Bacon et al. 2010), provide spectra of all objects in the field, i.e., without pre-selections, down to magnitudes 28 and be-yond (Bacon et al. 2017, 2023). At the same time, MUSE poses specific challenges because of its wavelength coverage resulting in objects detected over a wide redshift range ( z = 0−6.7), which can lead to emission line confusion, especially between [O ii ]

λλ 3727 , 3729 Å at z < 1.5 and Ly α λ 1216 Å at z > 2.8. Thanks to its exquisite sensitivity, MUSE can e ffi ciently find emission line objects without any continuum. As a result, the task of source detection and redshift identification in deep fields needs to be performed twice (Bacon et al. 2023), once on continuum-detected objects and once on emission line-detected objects, and currently, no existing tool can perform well on both types with-out visual inspections and validation. In addition, in the "redshift desert" at 1 .5 < z < 2.8, galaxies lack strong spectral emission features, making redshift determination heavily dependent on continuum shape. These challenges call for new approaches ca-pable of handling both continuum and emission-line–dominated spectra across the full MUSE redshift range. We present a method for automated galaxy redshift predic-tion, enabled by the availability of approximately 10,000 MUSE spectra with redshift labels. Our approach is based on Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF), which learns a low-rank, additive, and non-negative representation of galaxy spectra. By enforcing non-negativity, NMF provides a parts-based and more interpretable representation compared to other techniques like PCA. Moreover, NMF has been successfully applied in astro-physics to construct empirical spectral templates (Blanton & Roweis 2007) and to identify fundamental mid-infrared compo-nents of galaxy spectra from Spitzer /IRS (Hurley et al. 2013), demonstrating its e ff ectiveness. The method finds the best red-shift solution by non-negatively projecting a spectrum onto this representation for a range of trial redshifts, and then selecting the projection with the lowest reconstruction error. We apply our method to an independent test set and show its robustness. This paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we describe the data selection and preprocessing procedures. Sect. 3 presents the application of NMF to MUSE galaxy spectra and the gen-eral methodology underlying our redshift prediction framework. In Sect. 4, we report the test results and demonstrate two appli-cations of the method: (i) false and true sources separation, and (ii) spectral deblending. Finally, we discuss our results in Sect. 5 and conclude in Sect. 6. 

2. Data 

In this work, we used a collection of galaxy spectra taken from five MUSE Guaranteed Time Observations (GTO) sur-veys: (i) the MUSE Hubble Ultra-Deep Field (HUDF) surveys (Bacon et al. 2023, PI: R. Bacon), (ii) the MusE GAs FLOw and Wind [MEGAFLOW] survey (Bouché et al. 2025, PI: N. Bouché), (iii) the MUSCATEL survey (Urrutia, in prep; PI: L. Wisotzki), (iv) the MUSE-WIDE DR1 survey (Urrutia et al. 2019, PI: L. Wisotzki), and the MUSE gAlaxy Groups in COS-MOS (MAGIC) survey (Epinat et al. 2024, PI: T. Contini). The combination of these surveys provides a representative and diverse sample of galaxy spectra for learning and analysis. It includes galaxies of di ff erent types and spectral characteris-tics—from continuum-dominated systems to strong emission-and absorption-line galaxies—spanning wide redshift and mag-nitude ranges. The mixture of deep and shallow fields observed under di ff erent conditions provides spectra with varying signal-to-noise ratios (SNR), enabling us to evaluate the robustness of  

> Fig. 1. Main statistical properties of the selected MUSE galaxy sample. Distributions of (a) redshift, (b) redshift confidence score (ZCONF), (c) stellar continuum SNR (SNR cont ), and (d) emission /absorption lines collective SNR (SNR lines ).

our methods under realistic observational conditions. Table 1 summarizes some of the key characteristics of each survey. From these surveys, we selected spectra of galaxies based on two criteria. First, we required a secure redshift by select-ing galaxies with a redshift confidence score (ZCONF) of 1 or higher 1. Second, we visually inspected the spectra to exclude most of the bright blended spectra "blends" (overlap between multiple sources). Our selection yielded a sample of 9252 spectra. Fig. 1 sum-marizes the main properties of the sample, showing the distribu-tions of redshift, ZCONF, continuum SNR (SNR cont ), and lines’ SNR (SNR lines ). We computed SNR cont as the median SNR of the stellar continuum in the observed-frame 7650-7850 Å win-dow, chosen for its location within the region of highest MUSE throughput. In a given spectrum, we computed SNR lines as the quadrature sum of the signal-to-noise ratios of all detected emis-sion and absorption lines with detection significances exceed-ing 3 σ. The stellar continuum fit and line measurements were performed with the pyPlatefit package (Bacon et al. 2023), specifically developed for MUSE spectra. The preprocessing steps specific to our method are described in the following sec-tion. 

3. Methods 

3.1. Non-negative matrix factorization 

Non-negative matrix factorization is a Machine Learning tech-nique for dimensionality reduction (Lee & Seung 1999). Given                                            

> 1As discussed in Bacon et al. (2023), redshifts were obtained using a semi-automatic procedure where the five best redshift solutions pro-duced by a MUSE-adapted version of the MARZ algorithm were visually inspected by a group of experts, who evaluated the reliability of the redshift on a scale from 0 to 3: a ZCONF of 3 indicates a secure red-shift from multiple spectral lines; 2 represents a highly probable redshift from a single high SNR line or from multiple low SNR lines; 1 denotes a possible redshift from a low SNR line; and 0 is attributed when the redshift is undetermined. Article number, page 2 of 12 Bourahma, Bouché et al.: NMF on MUSE spectra
> Table 1. Summary of the MUSE surveys used in this work.
> Survey Area &depth # Spectra Ref. MUSE HUDF
> UDF10 1′×1′field, 10 h 351 (1) MOSAIC 3′×3′field, 31 h 1505 (1) MXDF 1′-diameter circular field, 141 h deep 691 (1)
> MEGAFLOW 22 quasar fields: 20 shallow ( ∼3 h) and 2 deep ( ∼11 h) 2427 (2)
> MAGIC 17 fields in COS-MOS, depths be-tween 1–10 h 1423 (3)
> MUSE-WIDE DR1
> 100 pointings in GOODS-S and CAN-DELS, each 1 h deep 1602 (4)
> MUSCATEL Deep (25 h), medium (5 h) and shallow (100 min) observa-tions in the Frontier Field Parallels. 4545 (5)
> References. (1) Bacon et al. (2023); (2) Bouché et al. (2025); (3) Epinat et al. (2024); (4) Urrutia et al. (2019); (5) Urrutia, in prep.

a data matrix X, NMF learns a low-dimensional representation by approximating X as the product of two non-negative, low-rank matrices, W and HX ≃ W H ,

X ∈ Rn×l 

> +

, W ∈ Rn×k 

> +

, H ∈ Rk×l 

> +

, and k << n, l. (1) In the specific case of galaxy spectra arranged row-wise in X

(see, Fig. 2), NMF reconstructs each spectrum in X as a positive linear combination of k basis vectors in H with coe ffi cients placed in the corresponding row of W . The number of basis vectors is directly controlled by the rank k; its value is free and must be fine-tuned (refer to 3.5). The prevalent algorithm to solve Eq. 1 is described in the seminal work of Lee & Seung. For our case, we adopt the more sophisticated "nearly-NMF" algorithm developed by Green & Bailey (2024) specifically for astronomical spectra. nearly-NMF extends Lee & Seung (1999) and Zhu (2016) algorithms to ac-count for heteroscedastic uncertainties and missing values. It also considers negative values in X, known to cause o ff sets in basis vectors if zero-clipped (Green & Bailey 2024). Briefly, they considered the following optimization problem, min   

> W∈Rn×k,H∈Rk×l

|| (X + Y ) − (W H + Y )|| 2

> F

s.t. W ≥ 0 and H ≥ 0,

(2) where matrix Y 2 holds the minimum shift to make each entry in X non-negative. F = 1/σ2 is the inverse-variance matrix associated with X, a zero weight is assigned to missing entries. To minimize this objective, they derived multiplicative iterative update rules for W and H matrices that guarantee convergence to a local minimum,       

> 2matrix Ychanges during iterations and can be di ff erent for Wand
> Hupdates

H = H ⊙

hW T (V ⊙ X)i+

W T (V ⊙ (W H )) + W T (V ⊙ X)−

W = W ⊙

h(V ⊙ X)HT i+

(V ⊙ (W H )) HT + (V ⊙ X)HT − ,

(3) where ⊙ is the element-wise product. Operation [ ] + applied on a matrix results in a matrix of the same shape, in which all negative values are zeroed. [ ] − on the other hand, zeroes the positive values and takes the absolute value of negative values. Next, we describe how we construct the matrix X and the re-lated processing steps. We then explain (in Sect. 3.3) how we can predict redshift using NMF learned basis vectors, and present several metrics used to validate the predictions (in Sect. 3.4). Finally, we present the rank selection and validation methods in Sect. 3.5. 

3.2. Data transformation 

The rest frame is more e ff ective for learning a representation of galaxy spectra with NMF, as spectral features align consistently at fixed wavelengths, enabling their learning. Consequently, we transform our MUSE galaxy spectra sample to the rest frame following these steps, 1. We define a common rest-wavelength grid, Γ, in logarithmic space. This grid spans the range 2 .77 ≤ log 10 λ ≤ 3.97, with a uniform logarithmic spacing ∆ log 10 λ = 2.215525 × 10 −5.The lower end of the grid corresponds to the bluest MUSE wavelength ( λobs ,min = 4600 ˚ A), and transformed into the rest frame assuming a maximum redshift of zmax = 6.7. The up-per end of the grid is given by the reddest MUSE wavelength (λobs ,max = 9350 ˚ A) at redshift zero. We derived the grid’s spacing, ∆ log 10 λ, from an equivalent reference linear grid. This linear grid spans the same spectral range and has a step size, ∆λref , determined by the maximally squeezed MUSE spectral sampling ( δλ ) in the rest frame, 

∆λref = δλ 

1 + zmax 

= 1.25 1 + 6.7 = 0.16233 ˚ A.

When this linear grid is transformed directly into logarith-mic space, it produces non-uniform logarithmic spacings. 

∆ log 10 λ is then taken as the mean of these resulting logarithmic spacings to define a constant. These choices resulted in a 53918-dimensional grid. 2. We express flux densities fλ in terms of the logarithmic rest wavelengths 

fλ(log 10 λrest ) = ln 10 fλ(λobs )λobs ,

log 10 λrest = log 10 λobs − log 10 (1 + z), (4) where λrest , λobs are respectively the rest and observed wavelengths, and z is the redshift. 3. For each spectrum, we linearly interpolate the pairs   fλ(log 10 λrest ), log 10 λrest 

 to the rest-frame wavelength grid 

Γ, and extrapolate with zeros in unobserved regions of Γ.Variances undergo the same transformations, except for the extrapolation part, where we assign a large number instead of zero. Figure 2 shows the result of the rest-frame transformation of our sample of galaxy spectra.   

> Article number, page 3 of 12 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa58275-25
> Fig. 2. MUSE galaxy spectra matrix in the rest frame. This matrix shows selected MUSE galaxy spectra, prepared for NMF decomposi-tion. Spectra are sorted by increasing redshift (from bottom to top) and transformed to their rest frame. Key redshifts are shown on the y-axis, and important spectral lines are indicated on top of the figure. The color of each pixel encodes flux density, scaled using a 95% z-scale to en-hance the visibility of emission lines. Bluer colors represent higher flux densities; white pixels denote missing or unobserved data.

3.3. Estimating redshift using NMF basis vectors 

Our method posits that the correct rest-frame of NMF basis vectors—aligned with the true redshift zt—achieves the best rep-resentation for a given observed galaxy spectrum. Conversely, an incorrect rest-frame will result in a poorer representation. For instance, consider a spectrum exhibiting nebular emission lines such as [O ii ], H β, strong and weak [O iii ]. Only the correct rest-frame allows for a simultaneous and accurate reconstruction of all these features. In contrast, an incorrect rest-frame may still reconstruct individual emission lines but will fail to model all of them collectively, as they are intrinsically absent. Following this principle, to determine the redshift of an ob-served spectrum, fλ, obs , we test all redshifts in the 0 ≤ z ≤ 6.7range with a step of 0 .0005. For each test redshift, ztest , we pro-ceed as follows: (a) We de-redshift the spectrum to its rest-frame assuming ztest ,following the same steps in 3.2, we note the de-redshifted spectrum fλ, test .(b) We reconstruct fλ, test using NMF basis vectors, 

fλ, test ≃ ωT H, (5) vector ω contains decomposition coe ffi cients. Eq. 5 is solved using a Non-Negative Least Squares (Bro & De Jong 1997), ensuring that the coe ffi cients are non-negative as in NMF. (c) We assess the reconstruction quality at ztest by computing the corresponding χ2 goodness-of-fit statistic, 

χ2(ztest ) =

> L

X

> i=1

fλ, test − ωT Hσλ, test 

!2

> i

, (6) 

σλ, test , is the corresponding standard deviations vector of 

fλ, test . L is the spectral dimension. Testing all redshifts results in a χ2(z) curve. The minimum of this curve χ2min then gives the predicted redshift zp. Moreover, we characterize this minimum with a ∆χ2 and a robustness score (see next subsection for definitions). We illustrate our method for a galaxy spectrum taken from the MXDF survey in Fig. 3 (a), and we show the corresponding χ2 curve in (b). 

3.4. Evaluation Metrics 

To evaluate a redshift prediction, we used the following quanti-ties from the χ2(z) curve: (a) Redshift significance score 3

∆χ2 = 1 − χ2min 

Q1(χ2) , (7) where χ2min denotes the minimum of the χ2 curve and Q 1(χ2)its first quartile. The first quartile provides a robust estimate of the typical χ2 away from the minimum (baseline of the χ2

curve). Thus, the quantity ∆χ2 measures how much the minimum deviates from the baseline of the χ2 curve, with higher values reflecting more significant minima. (b) Redshift robustness score 3

R = min (2) (χ2) − min (1) (χ2)

σQ1 (χ2) . (8) min (1) (χ2) and min (2) (χ2) denote the first and second min-ima of the χ2 curve, respectively. The quantity σQ1 (χ2) is the standard deviation of all χ2 values less than or equal to the first quartile. It provides an estimate of the intrinsic disper-sion of points lying on or below the χ2 curve baseline. Nor-malizing the separation between the first and second minima by σQ1 (χ2) measures its significance relative to the typical fluctuations of the χ2 curve, while being insensitive to high-

χ2 fluctuations. As the two minima approach each other, the score tends toward zero, indicating confusion between two redshift solutions. To test our method on a set of spectra with known redshifts, we use the following metrics from the predicted and true red-shifts: (a) Relative error 

δz = |zp − zt|

1 + zt

, (9) where zp is the predicted redshift and zt the true redshift.                 

> 3Note that our definitions for the redshift significance and robustness scores di ff er from other definitions that can be found in SDSS or DESI literature. Article number, page 4 of 12 Bourahma, Bouché et al.: NMF on MUSE spectra
> Fig. 3. Illustration of redshift prediction with NMF basis vectors. (a) shows the rest-frame spectrum of the UDF10-4 source at redshift 0.7649 in blue. This galaxy exhibits stellar continuum, strong [O ii ], H β, and [O iii ] spectral emission lines (their locations are indicated on top of the figure); the best NMF reconstruction is plotted in black. (b) reports the corresponding χ2curve, the minimum happens at the true redshift (vertical red dashed line), hence, successfully predicting the correct redshift. The second minimum in the χ2curve at z∼4.4 corresponds to a solution in which [O ii ] gets mistaken to be Lya. The values of the ∆χ2and Rmetrics are also reported in (b); their values indicate a significant minimum and a very robust redshift prediction.

(b) The Good Fraction (GF) This is the ratio of the number of good redshift predictions 

Ngood to the total number of predictions Ntotal . A redshift pre-diction is good when its error ∆z = |zp − zt| < tMUSE (1 + zt), where tMUSE is the adopted error-tolerance threshold. In this work, we fix tMUSE at 0.005, which corresponds to a value ten times the step size in the trial redshifts. GF = Ngood 

Ntotal 

. (10) (c) Mean Absolute error with outlier rejection MAE = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

|zp − zt|

1 + zt

!

. (11) Redshift predictions with a relative error five times larger than the Median Absolute deviation (MAD) are rejected. The MAD is defined as, MAD = median ( |δz − median( δz)|) ,

where δz is the vector of redshift relative errors. 

3.5. Rank selection and validation of the method 

The factorization rank k sets the number of basis vectors in the NMF decomposition and therefore controls the level of detail the model can represent. If k is too large, the model may adjust to noise; whereas if it is too small, it may fail to capture impor-tant spectral features. In both cases, the resulting basis vectors generalize poorly, making careful rank selection essential. In this work, we propose a rank selection strategy based on the performance in the redshift prediction task. We employ a K-fold cross-validation scheme (Kohavi 1995), in which the data is partitioned into K folds, with K-1 folds used to learn basis vectors under various rank hypotheses, and performance is eval-uated on the withheld fold. This process is repeated until each of the K folds has served as the testing set once. The best rank is then taken to be the one that provides the best performance across all testing folds. Given that our spectra matrix X is large (9252 × 53918), we chose K = 5; this number is a good trade-o ff between compu-tational speed, bias, and variance. We used the GF and MAE to quantify redshift prediction performance on the test folds. Re-sults of this exercise are reported in Fig. 4. We observe an improvement in the GF up to rank 10, beyond which it plateaus. In contrast, the MAE (with outlier rejection) increases steadily with rank, indicating that while a larger rank does not degrade the GF, it leads to less precise redshift estimates for non-outliers. Based on these observations, we fix the rank at 10 for the remainder of this work, as it gives the highest suc-cess rate and more precise redshift estimates compared to higher ranks.   

> Fig. 4. NMF Rank selection. The top and bottom panels show the mean GF and mean MAE with outlier rejection across the test folds, for ranks between 6 and 13. Corresponding standard deviations are shown as error bars. Both metrics are reported for spectra with ZCONF values of 2 and 3. Article number, page 5 of 12 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa58275-25

To conclude this section, we present in Fig. 5, the basis vec-tors obtained from a rank–10 NMF decomposition, applied to 80% of our sample. The basis vectors capture a broad range of spectral features, including prominent emission and absorption lines such as Ly α, [O ii], CaKH, H β, [O iii], and H α, with vary-ing relative line ratios across components. In addition, they en-code distinct stellar continuum characteristics: for example, vec-tor 10 is associated with red, evolved galaxy populations. Vec-tor 1 shows a blue continuum with a clear UV spectral slope indicative of star-forming galaxies. We further note that several emission lines, in particular [O ii] (see panel b), do not always coincide with their nominal rest-frame wavelengths (indicated by the vertical gray lines). Instead, the line center appears blue-shifted in vectors 1 and 9, redshifted in vector 5, and consistent with the rest frame in the remaining vectors. Similar behavior is observed for Ly α, which additionally exhibits a blue bump in some components. These variations indicate that the NMF basis naturally captures kinematic and radiative transfer e ff ects present in the galaxy spectra. A schematic overview of the main steps of our method is provided in Fig. 6. 

4. Results 

4.1. Performance results 

We evaluated the performance of our method using the first fold of the K-fold cross-validation setup. Rank-10 NMF basis vectors were derived from the learning subset, and performance was as-sessed on the testing subset, ensuring that no spectral data from the test set influenced the learning process. This evaluation fo-cused exclusively on 1454 spectra with a ZCONF ≥ 2. Figure 7 shows the scatter of the predicted redshift ( zp)against the true redshift ( zt). Our method successfully recov-ers the redshift for 1363 spectra (points on the diagonal), while 91 spectra have bad predictions (o ff -diagonal points), yielding an overall GF of 93 .7%. Inspection of the failures reveals three main causes: (1) spectra with poor flat-fielding, characterized by distorted continua at the blue and red ends; (2) spectra with a      

> Fig. 5. NMF learned basis vectors. Panel (a) shows the basis vectors obtained from a sequential rank–10 NMF decomposition applied to 80% of the sample. The index nlabels each basis vector. The names and rest-frame wavelengths of prominent spectral emission and absorption lines are indicated in the upper panels. Panel (b) presents zoomed-in views of the [O ii] and Ly αemission lines, shown in the first and second columns, respectively. In each zoom-in, the line’s peak flux is normalized to one, the line rest wavelength is shown with a vertical dashed gray line, and the corresponding basis vector is indicated. Article number, page 6 of 12 Bourahma, Bouché et al.: NMF on MUSE spectra
> Fig. 6. The workflow of redshift prediction using the rest-frame representation learned with nearly-NMF

large fraction of negative flux values (negative median flux); and (3) confusion between the [O ii ] doublet and Ly α, especially in spectra lacking stellar continuum and /or with broadened [O ii ]profiles due to galaxy kinematics. The latter confusion appears as a secondary diagonal above the main one in the scatter plot.  

> Fig. 7. Scatter plot of the predicted redshift ( zp) against true redshift ( zt)for the test set.

Figure 8 presents the relative error δz as a function of the significance score ∆χ2 (panel (a)) and the Robustness metric R

(panel (b)). We observe that almost all failed predictions corre-spond to ∆χ2 < 0.05 and R < 3. Moreover, we note that the R

distribution peaks at 5 and failed predictions cluster on the left tail of this distribution; a cut in R can therefore be used to secure redshifts (pure selection). Cases with R > 3 but incorrect pre-dictions are associated with spectra dominated by negative flux values. The three panels in Fig. 9 present the average GF as a func-tion of redshift, continuum SNR, and lines’ SNR. Overall, the GF remains above 90% across most redshift bins, with notable declines in the redshift desert ( z ∼ 2 and z ∼ 2.8) and at very high redshift ( z ≥ 6). In the redshift desert, the reduced perfor-      

> Fig. 8. Redshift prediction error and significance. (a) Scatter plot of redshift relative error ( δz) against significance score ∆χ2for the test set. (b) Scatter plot of δzagainst Robustness score R.

mance is due to the lack of strong spectral features in the spec-tra. At the highest redshifts, the GF has large uncertainties due to the small number of objects in these bins. When examined as a function of continuum SNR, the GF is largely stable and remains above 90% for nearly all bins, exhibiting only mild fluctuations at low SNR. A modest performance improvement is observed   

> Article number, page 7 of 12 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa58275-25
> Fig. 9. Performance as a function of redshift and SNR. (a) Average GF as a function of redshift, (b) GF as a function of the continuum SNR (SNR cont ), (c) GF as a function of the lines SNR (SNR lines ). The shaded regions indicate 68% Wilson confidence intervals.

toward higher continuum SNR values, although the dependence is comparatively weak. In contrast, the strongest dependence is seen as a function of the lines’ SNR. The GF is very low for SNR lines ≲ 7, rises steadily with increasing SNR, and approaches unity at SNRlines ∼ 13, beyond which it plateaus. This trend in-dicates that the number of emission /absorption lines and their signal-to-noise ratios are the dominant factors governing the GF. 

4.2. Performance with varying depth 

Increasing survey depth improves data quality by reducing noise and enables the detection of faint objects. To investigate the impact of exposure time on our method, we applied it to four samples of spectra with di ff erent exposure times: MXDF ( ∼ 140 hours), UDF10 ( ∼ 30 hours), MEGAFLOW medium fields ( ∼ 11 hours), and MEGAFLOW shallow fields ( ∼ 3 hours). We then measured the average GF in bins of the F775 W magnitude for each sample; as shown in Fig. 10. As expected, the GF improves with increasing survey depth. The MXDF sample delivers the best performance, maintain-ing a GF ≳ 90% down to F775 W ∼ 32. The UDF10 and MEGAFLOW medium fields show comparable performance and    

> Fig. 10. Performance with varying depth. The di ff erent curves show the averaged GF in bins of the F775 Wmagnitude for various surveys with di ff erent depths. Shaded regions indicate 68% Wilson confidence intervals.

perform only worse at magnitudes fainter than ∼ 30; for the MEGAFLOW medium fields, this regime is a ff ected by low-number statistics. In contrast, the MEGAFLOW shallow fields already show a decline in GF below 90% at F775 W ∼ 28. These results demonstrate that survey depth is a key factor for achiev-ing reliable redshift predictions at faint magnitudes ( F775 W ≳

28). 

4.3. Threshold on ∆χ2

Unlike MOS, where spectroscopy is carried out on prese-lected targets (e.g., photometrically selected), IFS provides spec-troscopy of everything in the field of view. In MUSE surveys, sources must be blindly detected using algorithms such as ORI-GIN (Mary et al. 2020) or FELINE (Wendt et al. 2025), which can produce many false positives in order to be highly complete. Currently, these false sources are processed by the redshift pre-diction pipeline just like real objects, and identified and marked as ZCONF0 during the visual inspection step (e.g. Bacon et al. 2023). A reliable automatic redshift prediction tool must cope with these contaminants and classify them accordingly. Here, we in-vestigate the ability of our method to discriminate between true and false sources, relying on the ∆χ2 significance score. Specif-ically, we applied our redshift prediction method to ZCONF0 spectra from the MXDF survey, and then compared their ∆χ2

predicted redshift significance score distribution with those of spectra having higher ZCONF scores taken from the same sur-vey. Figure 11 shows the distribution of log 10 ∆χ2 for the 4 ZCONF classes. Looking at the four distributions, we can see that the significance score discriminates ZCONF2 and ZCONF3 classes from the ZCONF0 class, with almost no overlap. We note that ZCONF2 sources that overlap with ZCONF0 originate from spectra with a high fraction of negative values. ZCONF1 distri-   

> Article number, page 8 of 12 Bourahma, Bouché et al.: NMF on MUSE spectra
> Fig. 11. Redshift significance score and ZCONF. log 10 ∆χ2distribution for the 4 classes of ZCONF in the MXDF survey.

bution, on the other hand, shows some overlap with ZCONF0 distribution. In this overlapping region, it becomes hard to dis-tinguish between a very faint true source and a false one, e.g., originating from bad flat-fielding. We observe that a threshold at log 10 ∆χ2 = −2, allows us to keep all of the ZCONF2 and ZCONF3 sources and a large frac-tion of ZCONF1 sources while rejecting most of the ZCONF0 sources. For this cut, we quote a completeness score 4 of 95 .9%, and a purity score 5 of 96 .0%. 

4.4. Application on blends 

To ensure the robustness of our analysis, we have so far delib-erately excluded blended sources. For large-scale applications and studies involving deep fields, however, it becomes essential to identify and flag such blended sources, as they are ubiquitous (Melchior et al. 2021) and constitute a primary cause of incorrect redshift determinations, given that redshift pipelines (including ours) generally recover the redshift of the most luminous com-ponent (Baron & Poznanski 2016). In this subsection, we explore the feasibility of blend detec-tion based exclusively on 1D spectra using our learned NMF ba-sis vectors. We follow the framework described in Tsalmantza & Hogg (2012) with some adaptations. The method proceeds as follows: (a) For a given spectrum fλ, we predict its redshift using our method. We note the obtained χ2(z) curve χ21 and the corre-sponding redshift z1. Note that if the spectrum is blended, this step identifies the redshift component exhibiting the strongest features. (b) We use pyPlatefit to fit the spectrum at z1, and note the fitted spectrum ˆfλ, z1 . The goal of this step is, on the one hand, to maximally reduce reconstruction residuals, and on the other hand, to fit rare lines that are not captured by our NMF basis vectors. If not accounted for, these rare lines result in false blend detections. To this end, we extended the default line list used by pyPlatefit to include Fe ii ⋆,C ii ⋆ and Si ii ⋆ fluorescence emission lines, He i λ3187 .745, He i λ4471 .479, He i λ5875 .624, and [N i] λ5200 .257 emis-sion lines. (c) Following the same steps in our redshift prediction method, we scan all possible redshifts a second time. This time at   

> 4Fraction of ZCONF 1, 2 or 3 sources that are successfully selected
> 5Fraction of selected sources that are truly ZCONF 1, 2 or 3

each test redshift, we augment our basis by injecting ˆfλ, z1 .We denote by H(zi) the NMF basis vectors corresponding to redshift zi, where i indexes test redshifts. The augmented basis at zi is written as 

H′ (zi) = n ˆfλ, z1 , H(zi)o .

At each zi, we non-negatively project fλ into H′ (zi), and compute the reconstruction error, following the same equa-tions in 5 and 6. We note the obtained χ2(z) curve χ22.(d) We identify all minima in χ22 and discard minima that are in confusion with z1. If a minimum with ∆χ2 > tblend remains— 

tblend is a threshold for class separation—, we flag the spec-trum as blended. The remaining minimum with the high-est significance score ∆χ2 gives the blending redshift z2; we note the second reconstruction of the NMF ˆfλ, z2 .These steps can be repeated to search for double or even triple blends. Here, we stop after one blend detection trial, as our goal is to detect blends and not to estimate the number of mixing com-ponents. Figure 12 illustrates an example of a blended source detected by our approach. We applied our deblending approach to all MXDF survey sources with a ZCONF of 1 or higher, for a total of 664 objects. We inspected all sources and flagged blended ones using the 

SourceInspector software and the AMUSED 6 interface (Bacon et al. 2023) 7. From the 664 objects, we flagged 183 as blended and removed 3 objects classified as stars. For this test, we present the Receiver Operating Character-istic curve (ROC curve) in Fig. 13. This curve reports the true positive rate (TPR) versus the false positive rate (FPR) for a se-ries of thresholds ( tblended ) spanning 0.003-0.05 with a step of 0.001. TPR and FPR are defined as TPR = TP P , FPR = FP N ,

where TP is the number of true positive detections (correctly pre-dicted as blended), FP is the number of false positive detections (incorrectly predicted as blended), P is the total number of posi-tive labels (number of blends), and N is the total number of neg-ative labels (number of sources not blended). Next, we quantify the performance based on the ROC curve and choose a threshold that best balances between the TPR and FPR. To quantify the performance of our deblending approach, we use the Area Under the Curve (AUC) score. Values close to 1 indicate excellent discrimination, and in our case, the AUC is 0.87, categorizing our method as having "good" performance. We selected the optimal threshold as the point that minimizes the Euclidean distance to the ideal classifier (0,1), resulting in a TPR of 0.78, a FPR of 0.18, and a threshold on ∆χ2 equal to 0.011. We note that this value is very close to the separation threshold between true and false sources (see 4.3). Upon examining the classifications, we found that false positives mainly result from sky-subtraction residuals, bad 

pyPlatefit fits, and noise. Undetected blends at the optimal threshold correspond to very weak blends. Additionally, we ob-served that some blends remain undetected even at low thresh-olds ( ∆χ2 < 0.01). This occurs when a blending with one line coincides with a line of the first redshift, in which case 

pyPlatefit absorbs the blending line in step (b).     

> 6https://amused.univ-lyon1.fr/
> 7SourceInspector enables interactive inspection of narrow-band images and localization of emission within the datacube, while AMUSED
> provides an e ffi cient way to identify nearby sources Article number, page 9 of 12

A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa58275-25 

Fig. 12. Debelending MXDF-7381. The top left panel shows the spectrum of MXDF-7381 ( fλ) in blue, best fit at z1 ( ˆ fλ, z1 ) in orange and the second reconstruction at z2 ( ˆ fλ, z2 ) as a dashed black line. Bottom panels show the obtained χ21 and χ22 curves from left to right. χ21 reveals a minimum at a redshift z1 = 0.6665 corresponding to the blending component, whereas χ22 reveals a minimum at z2 = 0.3235 which corresponds to MXDF-7381 true redshift. The top right panel shows a white image of MXDF-7381 with nearby sources, where we can see the presence of a close source, MXDF-943, which has the blending redshift z1.

Fig. 13. Deblending test ROC curve. The TPR versus the FPR is plotted as a blue line. The value of the AUC score is shown, and the optimal threshold is marked by the green point. 

We conclude this subsection by suggesting possible improve-ments. Unlike Tsalmantza & Hogg (2012), who doubles the ba-sis vectors at each test redshift—keeping one set fixed at the first redshift while the other slides with the test redshift—our approach augments the basis vectors using the pyPlatefit best fit at the first redshift. This strategy has the advantage of mini-mizing residuals at the location of spectral lines; however, it also results in the continuum being completely absorbed during the fit. Introducing a continuum model with fewer degrees of free-dom could mitigate this issue and enable the detection of blended objects via continuum features. Additionally, exploiting the spa-tial origin of the emission would help identify cases in which a blending with one line coincides with another line of the first redshift. 

4.5. Application to a new dataset 

We tested our method on a new reduction of the MUSE-WIDE survey (DR2), which benefits from improved sky-subtraction and flat-fielding (Urrutia, in prep), and includes more sources (2332 sources in DR2 compared to 1602 sources in DR1). After inspecting all 2332 spectra and removing blends and spectra with very broad features, we obtain an overall GF of 97.1% on ZCONF2 and ZCONF3 classes. The GF of each ZCONF class is reported in Table 2. Inspection of the failed pre-dictions reveals that the majority of them are due to confusion between [O ii ] and Ly α.

Table 2. MUSE-WIDE DR2 survey test results. 

ZCONF 1 2 3GF 77 .2% 95 .2% 99 .0% 

Article number, page 10 of 12 Bourahma, Bouché et al.: NMF on MUSE spectra 

4.6. Implementation and computational time 

We make available the data matrix used in this work, implemen-tation of the nearly-NMF algorithm, and the code for our redshift prediction method in a Julia package Moose.jl , along with a Python wrapper. Our implementation takes approximately 200 ms to test 7000 redshifts for a single input spectrum; the code was run on a 24-threads CPU with multi-threading applied to parallelize multiple redshift tests. This time can be reduced in many ways: by decreasing the resolution δΓ of the basis vectors, by selecting redshifts to test if prior information is available, or by the use of a CPU with more threads. Such computation time is reasonable for current MUSE surveys. 

5. Discussion 

In this study, we demonstrated that learning a rest-frame rep-resentation of galaxy spectra through NMF in a data-driven setup provides an e ff ective framework for automated redshift estimation. By projecting new spectra onto this representation under non-negativity constraints and identifying the best-fitting decomposition, our method attained an overall success rate of 93 .7% when applied to MUSE spectra. To further quantify the reliability of each measurement, we introduced a ∆χ2 score; adopting a threshold at ∆χ2 = 0.01 yielded a very good sep-aration between ZCONF0 and higher-confidence redshifts, il-lustrating the robustness of our approach against false detec-tions (ZCONF0), which are common in IFS data. Finally, we assessed the feasibility of blend detection using our NMF basis and showed that approximately 78% of blended objects can be recovered at a false positive rate of 18%. Because standard redshift inference tools have been devel-oped and tested primarily on low-redshift spectra ( z<3), we do not attempt a direct numerical comparison. Instead, we empha-size that our method was applied to MUSE spectra spanning red-shifts between 0 and 6.7, a range that presents significant chal-lenges: line confusion such as Ly α/[O ii ] and Ly α/Hα, and the redshift desert. Achieving an overall 93 .7% success rate across this regime demonstrates that our method is robust under condi-tions that are not systematically addressed by existing tools. Next, we compare our method with the methodological choices in established approaches. Classical tools, such as 

RedRock , estimate redshifts by fitting a set of archetype tem-plates constructed from a combination of observed and synthetic spectra, whereas our method learns the templates directly from the data, enabling it to adapt to the diversity of the sample. 

AUTOZ , on the other hand, relies on cross-correlation with a set of SDSS templates, which requires subtracting the stellar con-tinuum and discards physically informative broadband features. Cross-correlation also su ff ers from well-known issues, includ-ing template mismatch, ambiguous peaks in the cross-correlation function when a spectrum is dominated by a single emission line, and reduced robustness when spectra deviate from the as-sumed template family. In comparison, our method leverages the full stellar continuum, which constitutes a discriminative source of information, especially when separating between Ly α and [O ii ]. Recent deep-learning approaches, such as GaSNet III 

and M-TOPnet , train neural networks to predict redshifts using strategies such as multi-task learning and representation learn-ing. While these networks achieve high performance, they re-quire large labeled datasets ( > 20 000 spectra) for training, and typically operate on continuum-subtracted inputs, which again removes potentially discriminative information. By contrast, our method requires far fewer training examples ( ≲7,000) and pro-cesses the full spectrum, making it both competitive with and complementary to these approaches. Despite its robustness, our method has limitations. We find reduced performance in spectra a ff ected by artifacts such as: (1) residuals from imperfect sky subtraction, (2) flat-fielding errors that distort the continuum, and (3) spectra with a negative me-dian flux, where NNLS decompositions often fail. Because such artifacts are unavoidable in IFS data, a promising direction is to replace the NNLS solver with a neural network (e.g., encoder-like architecture) that enforces non-negativity while learning to ignore such artifacts, potentially leading to further performance gains. 

6. Conclusions 

In this work, we presented a method for automatic redshift pre-diction for MUSE galaxy spectra. These spectra span a wide redshift range (0 < z < 6.7), where classical tools perform poorly or have not been systematically tested. The method learns a low-rank representation through non-negative matrix factoriza-tion and estimates redshifts by projecting new spectra onto this basis and evaluating χ2 errors across trial redshifts. Using a K-fold cross-validation, we identified ten basis vec-tors as the optimal representation, and our method achieved a Good Fraction of 93 .7% on an independent test set. Most of the failed predictions resulted from confusion between the [O ii ]doublet and Ly α. To assess the reliability of a prediction, we introduced two metrics: the significance score ∆χ2 and the ro-bustness score R. We found that failed predictions are typically associated with low values of both metrics, with R showing good discriminating power. We demonstrated an application of our method to spectral deblending. The approach first identifies and fits the dominant redshift component, then re-scans for secondary redshift solu-tions after augmenting the NMF basis with the fitted spectrum. When applied to MXDF sources, the method achieved strong performance, recovering 78% of blended sources with a false positive rate of 18%. Applied to a dataset with improved reduction, the method reached a Good Fraction of 97 .1% on sources with ZCONF2 and ZCONF3, demonstrating robust generalization and sensitivity to data quality. We further evaluated its ability to identify false de-tections and showed that a threshold at ∆χ2 = 0.01 e ffi ciently separates genuine from spurious sources. Overall, these results demonstrate that low-rank representa-tions obtained via NMF provide a flexible and data-driven frame-work for automated redshift determination across a broad red-shift range. In addition to high accuracy, the method o ff ers intrin-sic reliability diagnostics, making it well-suited for application to current and coming large spectroscopic surveys.    

> Acknowledgements. We thank A. Casey for fruitful discussions in the initial phases of the project. NB acknowledges support from the ANR DARK grant (ANR-22-CE31-0006). MB acknowledges support from the Blaise Pascal GPU computing infrastructure. TU acknowledges funding from the European Re-search Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement 101020943, SPECMAP-CGM). Part of this work was supported by the German Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG project number Ts 17 /2–1.

References 

> Anand, A., Guy, J., Bailey, S., et al. 2024, AJ, 168, 124
> Article number, page 11 of 12

A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa58275-25 

Bacon, R., Accardo, M., Adjali, L., et al. 2010, in Society of Photo-Optical In-strumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 7735, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy III, ed. I. S. McLean, S. K. Ram-say, & H. Takami, 773508 Bacon, R., Brinchmann, J., Conseil, S., et al. 2023, A&A, 670, A4 Bacon, R., Conseil, S., Mary, D., et al. 2017, A&A, 608, A1 Baldry, I. K., Alpaslan, M., Bauer, A. E., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 441, 2440 Baron, D. & Poznanski, D. 2016, MNRAS, 465, 4530 Blanton, M. R. & Roweis, S. 2007, AJ, 133, 734 Bolton, A. S., Schlegel, D. J., Aubourg, É., et al. 2012, AJ, 144, 144 Bouché, N. F., Wendt, M., Zabl, J., et al. 2025, A&A, 694, A67 Bro, R. & De Jong, S. 1997, J. Chemom, 11, 393 Cirasuolo, M., Fairley, A., Rees, P., et al. 2020, Msngr, pp. 10-17, June 2020. Collaboration, D., Abareshi, B., Aguilar, J., et al. 2022, AJ, 164, 207 Dalton, G., Trager, S., Abrams, D., et al. 2012, in Proceedings of SPIE, Vol. 8446 de Jong, R. S., Agertz, O., Berbel, A. A., et al. 2019, Msngr, 175, 3 Epinat, B., Contini, T., Mercier, W., et al. 2024, A&A, 683, A205 Ginolfi, M., Mannucci, F., Belfiore, F., et al. 2025, A&A, 693, A73 Green, D. & Bailey, S. 2024, ITSP, 72, 5187 Hinton, S., Davis, T. M., Lidman, C., Glazebrook, K., & Lewis, G. 2016, A&C, 15, 61 Hurley, P. D., Oliver, S., Farrah, D., Lebouteiller, V., & Spoon, H. W. W. 2013, MNRAS, 437, 241–261 Inami, H., Bacon, R., Brinchmann, J., et al. 2017, A&A, 608, A2 Kohavi, R. 1995, in Proc. 14th Int. Joint Conf. Artificial Intelligence, 1137–1143 Lee, D. D. & Seung, H. S. 1999, Nature, 401, 788 Mary, D., Bacon, R., Conseil, S., Piqueras, L., & Schutz, A. 2020, A&A, 635, A194 Melchior, P., Joseph, R., Sanchez, J., MacCrann, N., & Gruen, D. 2021, NatRP, 3, 712 Tsalmantza, P. & Hogg, D. W. 2012, ApJ, 753, 122 Urrutia, T., Wisotzki, L., Kerutt, J., et al. 2019, A&A, 624, A141 Wendt, M., Henschel, M., & Soth, O. F. 2025, JOSS, 10, 7528 York, D. G., Adelman, J., Anderson, Jr., J. E., et al. 2000, AJ, 120, 1579–1587 Zhong, F., Napolitano, N. R., Heneka, C., et al. 2025, MNRAS, 543, 691 Zhu, G. 2016, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1612.06037 

Article number, page 12 of 12